But the type is so small.
Oh, yeah, that's weird that-
Yeah, it's kind of funny.
Probably just look at it on my computer.
Right. Good morning. Are we there on now? There.
You're managing the system. Good on you.
Good morning.
Mr. Kanhari, are you there?
Yeah. Good morning, everyone.
Good morning. Now, we've got
10 minutes with you. It'd be helpful if you left some time.
We've read your submission. We've read all submissions.
So maybe just leave a bit of time for questioning if you can.
Thank you. Floor is yours.
Okay. Yeah.
The chairperson and members of the select
committee, thank you for the opportunity to make this
submission.
On behalf of the NZIBA, New Zealand Indian Business
Association, I appear today to support and
strengthen the Trespass Act reform,
particularly to address the growing challenge of repeat offending in
retail and community-facing environment.
The Act we are discussing
is the Trespass Act 1980, which came into effect
on 1st January 1981,
and it is now over 45 years old.
Given the significant changes in societal conditions,
security concerns, and enforcement realities since
its introduction,
it warrants a thorough review to ensure
so that it remains relevant and effective in the current context.
The issue that we need to highlight today is the repeat
breaches of the trespass orders.
Across New Zealand, we see that in particular in urban areas
such as Auckland, trespass orders are increasingly being issued,
but not effectively acting as a deterrent for repeat offending.
While exact national figures on trespass breaches are
not centrally published, the related
enforcement data from New Zealand police and retail crime
trends indicate that the sustained increase in repeat retail offending
and store-based incidents over recent years, particularly
involving theft, intimidation, and disorderly
behavior have been going up. So
according to an estimate, there were 400,000
trespass notices issued in the last decade, starting from
2016 to 2025.
The industry reporting from retail associations also
consistently highlights that a significant proportion of
incidents involve repeat offenders
already known to the staff. Many offenders re-enter
premises within days or even hours
after being trespassed.
Small retailers and convenience stores are disproportionately affected
due to limited security resources.
The core issue is not simply the issuing of trespass notices,
but the lack of practical enforceability and consequences
when those notices are breached repeatedly.
The practical reality for the businesses is that many
small business owners, especially dairy shops,
liquor stores, and suburban supermarkets,
the trespass notices are becoming routine tool, but one that
is increasingly ineffective in practice.
The staff often report offenders return multiple times
despite being formally trespassed.
Police response is often
prioritized for higher severity incidents only.
Staff are left managing ongoing risk and intimidation
themselves.
This creates a situation where the trespass system exists on paper,
but its deterrent effect is significantly weakened in
practice.
Across
Auckland and other parts of New Zealand, retailers and small business
owners consistently report that individuals
who have been formally trespassed often return to the same premises
within days or weeks, and in some cases, repeatedly
over extended periods. These
incidents are not confined to one suburb or one type
of business.
They affect almost everyone alike.
The consequences go beyond financial loss, creating ongoing
stress for staff, undermining confidence in the effectiveness of
trespass notices, and forcing some businesses to
invest in additional security measures or reduce
operating hours.
This pattern demonstrates that while trespass
notices are
an important legal tool, their practical deterrent effect is
limited.
It has got long-reaching effect on workers and communities.
The retail workers often report that they feel unsafe
during shifts, anxiety about repeat offenders returning,
verbal abuse and threatening behavior, in some cases,
reduced hours or closure of evening
operations. This has a direct impact on the
community access to essential services,
viability of small businesses, perceptions of
safety in town centers and suburban retail areas.
There is a policy gap for sure, and the enforcement and
consequences. At present, the
trespass-Act relies heavily on individual
businesses issuing notices.
The offenders voluntarily comply,
and the police intervention only when further offending
occurs.
This gap lies in the repeat breach enforcement mechanism and
escalation pathways.
Where trespass notices are repeatedly ignored, the consequences
are often not proportioned to the ongoing harm experienced by
business and staff.
Why we need amendment is that there should be a clear
escalation for repeat trespass breaches,
more consistent
enforcement thresholds, and improved ability for police
to act on repeated violations.
And there should be better recognition of repeat offending patterns in
retail environments, and stronger
deterrents for individuals who repeatedly
target the same premises.
The intent is not to criminalize the minor behavior, but
to ensure that repeated
disregard of the lawful trespass notices
has meaningful consequences.
Mr. Kenhouri, do you want us to ask questions, or
we're getting near the end of yours message?
I'll just finish in a minute.
Okay.
So on behalf of the association, we just
support the current
Amendment Act be passed, in its current proposed
form.
Yeah, that's all.
Okay. First question. First, your
420,000
trespass notices over the nine years or 45,000 a year, it's a
staggering figure.
Mm-hmm.
Do you own a
supermarket or, I don't know, like-
Yeah. We earlier used to own a
hospitality business, and-
Okay
... where we have experienced such incidents
ourselves. And-
So what you're talking about is you've often had
personal experience where people have come and done
things, tried to trespass, and they come back.
You keep repeatedly talking about-
Yeah. I have personally experienced such
incidents while in the hospitality, and
sometimes they smash on the doors.
They just come inside. And one of the
hospitality, I was there at the lunchtime,
and one of the persons, he just came in and
he just threw
a glass on the wall and
it would have hurt the customer, but
fortunately no one was hurt. The police
was called, and he was issued the trespass notice.
But I
came to know about from the staff that he was seen around that,
and they were quite scared.
Right. Okay. I've got a question from Rhema Nakale.
Yeah.
Sat Sri Akaal, Jaspreet.
Thank you very much for all the work that you're doing on behalf of our
businesses. And I just want to ask, so what I'm
understanding, you support the bill, but you just want to make sure that
there's clarity with respect to how to implement these changes.
Correct. Yeah. We have been talking to the
retailers in our association. We have got
350 plus members at the moment, and
quite often we come to hear about
random incidents
which keeps happening, and we often hear such incidents,
although, as I said, there is no record of such incidents.
But
this is quite normal in the retail setup.
Sure. Yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for your presentation this morning and going
through all that.
Thank you very much. Thank you for it all.
Right. Now, we've got the New Zealand Law Society
on Zoom.
Maybe in the room.
We've got lots of professors.
Great.
If the professors are ready, we're ready to hear from you.
Sorry.
Good morning.
Mr. Chairman, sorry. That's me being technological incompetent.
Are you on your own?
No, Professor Wilson is trying to join, but she's on mute at the
moment.
We have had difficulties getting in through the Zoom app.
All right. Hey.
She's here now.
Rip into it. We've read your submission, so-
Yeah
... let's pick up on the-
Well, we'll start with the point that,
since you know who we are, that-
Yes
... the Law Society view is that the bill should not pass in its
current form. There are a number of reasons for this.
A significant part of it is the policy development process has
been
underdone, to say the least. We note the number of government
departments which have said that they don't support proposals
in the bill. The police have said they can't operationalize it.
The Privacy Commissioner has raised problems.
We've also got Ministry of Social Development, Te Puni Kōkiri,
Oranga Tamariki, and the Ministry of Justice itself all saying
that parts of the bill won't work. And that is a real
signal that there needs to be a
reset. And the Law Society view is that there should be a
start-again process with full public
consultation, wider consultation-I
note that the previous speaker's concerns about
enforcement of trespass notices and
penalties for trespass offending are not addressed in the
bill. That would be a logical place to include.
A reset would allow that to be taken into account.
The second area that I want to talk about is drafting issues,
and then I'll hand over to Professor Wilson to talk
about
some of the issues about the inclusion of notices with multiple
locations,
privacy issues, and particularly the issue that may arise
if there's widespread use of facial recognition
software.
The first drafting issue is the very simple one of the
definition of specified retail premises,
which doesn't define the word premises.
And that's the starting problem, because we don't know
exactly what is going to be included, and you can't assess
the impact of the bill from it.
All the subparts of Clause 4 refer to premises.
But if we take the example of a typical suburban
shopping mall, you're going to have a range of places which
are clearly specified retail premises.
They sell food or alcohol for consumption there
or to take away. There may be a food court which has
multiple outlets, but is also the
main pedestrian thoroughfare through the mall.
And so you want to know whether the pedestrian pathway
through the food court is part of those premises or not,
because that affects whether or not people are trespassing.
It's highly likely there will be something like a fast food
outlet with a drive-through
lane. And is the lane way of the drive-through
part of the premises or not? And then there's the wider question
of, is the parking area of a
mall premises from which property is
sold? There really does
need to be a very significant
design amendment to make this clear.
And
we would urge the committee, if the bill proceeds,
to take advice and to consult on what might be a
suitable definition. And the Law Society would be delighted to assist
if it could.
There's a subsidiary problem in relation to the
exclusion of premises which are occupied by a local
body, because we don't actually know in that sense what is
occupied.
There are several
libraries and museums in Christchurch which have a cafe within them.
So the question of defining where the boundaries of that are, are
difficult.
And particularly in one case, we have a library which
is within a mall,
and if the trespass notice applied to the whole
mall, we would then prevent somebody from accessing the
library, which would be an exempt premises.
And so there's a bit of a sort of logical
contradiction there.
There's also an issue which we put in at paragraphs
3.5 to 3.7 of the written submission about
what is meant by finished goods, which is a phrase that
has very unclear meaning, as is explored in the
submission, and we would
ask that the committee take advice on that.
Right. I'll hand over to Professor Wilson
at this point. If there is time after she speaks and there are
no questions for us, I have one other point I'd like to come back to.
But Deborah?
Thank you.
So I want to talk about just a couple of language
parts, particularly in 4A and 4B. So 4A deals
with trespass after the warning to stay off
specific premises given by a single occupier.
We're quite concerned that the language says that somebody could be trespassed for
three years regardless of whether there is cause to suspect that they will
commit a further crime. So the consequences of being told that
you can't go near any property
owned by this person for three years
is very strong. And to
say that it's regardless of whether they think this person will commit another
crime is quite serious in my mind.
There are severe implications for people's access to essential services.
If you get trespassed from supermarkets, the nearest supermarket could
be quite a distance away, and these days, people just can't afford the petrol to go
and travel.
Yeah.
Same with being trespassed from pharmacies, from petrol
stations. You're actually setting people up to fail because they
simply can't go the distance they need to go to go somewhere
else.
I'm also concerned about
the fairness in this provision. So it says that an occupier
can trespass not from that property, but from any other
property that they occupy. And I think that's really difficult for some of
us to know what that might extend to.
So if you imagine that I was trespassed from a KFC store,
I can understand that I'm trespassed from that KFC store, but I'm
also technically trespassed from any other store that that occupier
owns. Now, some KFC stores are franchise, so I can go into those
ones. Some KFC stores are not. I can't go into those.
I also know that KFC owns other fast food.
Do they still own Pizza Hut, Carl's Jr?
So there's a bunch of other things.
I would not understand where I can go and where I can't
go.The obvious other example is with
supermarkets.
I know that there are two companies that own all of the supermarkets, plus the
Four Squares and various vegetable stores in New Zealand, but I don't know who
owns what. So if I'm trespassed from New World,
can I go to Pak'nSave?
I don't know. Again, I think it's asking too much of
regular people to actually have this information.
The other thing I want to talk about is that there is a lack of a defense in
Section 4A, and that relates to
a defense of mistaken identity. There was a really interesting report
come out of the UK just a month ago, where a lot of people had been
trespassed from various supermarkets and other shops due to facial
recognition technology identifying them as having shoplifted from that
store. Now, these people demanded to see the
recordings, and they could quite clearly see that the person on the
recording was not them.
But there was nothing that they could do about it.
They said to the owners, "Look, that's not me." And the owner said, "Well, it
doesn't matter, you trespassed for three years."
There was nothing that these people could do. They were tagged as trespassers.
They couldn't go to their nearest supermarkets, but there was no system in place
for them to actually put forward a defense of mistaken
identity.
And we're very much aware that underlying this bill is the idea that facial
recognition technology-
Guys, we're running out of time.
I know I've got people banking up to ask questions, but we're literally going to
run out of time. Have you got anything else, Professor Wilson, just
finish off?
Just my other point under 4B is that groups of retailers
can get together and agree that if one trespasses, then they all
can.
Yeah.
It's going to be about 10 minutes before all of a CBD gets together and
signs this. So you will be trespassing people from huge
neighborhoods for three years, and I think that's incredibly dangerous.
Yeah. Okay.
Professor Finn, did you have something else significant, or should I-
No, it's about the reverse onus-
Yeah
... provision, but that's in the submission.
Okay.
I don't need to repeat it.
I'm going to
take two. I've got actually more, but I'm going to take Carl Bates. Mr.
Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Very quickly, your points about the premises and the
finished goods, found quite interesting.
Had you given any consideration to what a definition could be, or you're just
raising the concerns?
I think the question...
I haven't tried to draft a definition.
Okay. That's all right.
But it would take some skilled drafting, and we're happy to help.
Okay, thank you for that offer. Dan Rosenfeld.
Warren, sorry. Rosenfeld.
Thanks, Chair. Hey, the bill allows someone to be treated as
knowing that they were trespassed even if the warning wasn't
completed.
And
could that wording lead to people being convicted even if
they didn't actually understand that they were being trespassed?
Yes.
Yeah.
Unquestionably. And there is no requirement that
with an oral warning, it be completed.
There is no requirement it be understood by the person.
So you've got real problems. You've got real problems with children, because this
act applies to children as well.
Okay, because you're giving quick answers.
Dr.
Webb.
Yeah. Kia ora,
former colleagues.
My question's around the concept of trespass and the
ability to trespass people without cause.
And Deborah, it's really about your defense.
If you don't need a reason to trespass someone,
can't you just rand- the whole idea is you can randomly trespass whoever you like
because it's private property, right? There's a quite different framing.
How does that fit in with your idea of being able to say, "That's not me, so you
can't trespass me"?
The short answer-
I think there's-
Sorry.
The short answer is the private property right
unquestionably was designed to deal with property which was
occupied solely by a person. When we're dealing with
businesses, you are dealing with people who have a certain kind of
social license to operate,
and as particularly, I mean, liquor licenses are required.
Other places must be licensed premises.
They're inspected for health and safety and so on.
So-
There is a social license to enter, and we've suggested that-
Can I just interrupt? Do you therefore think there's a
three-tier thing where you've got private
property, semi-private property or public interest property,
and truly public property?
I would think that that's a fair
assumption, and we are blurring the line.
Well, we are trying to draw a line
which increases what is truly private property,
and that at the expense of the sort of social license
property. I know that's a long, that's why you need consultation,
a long time to talk about this.
Okay. Well, no doubt Dr. Duncan Webb's going
to prosecute it on your behalf. Right.
Hey, thank you very much for your contribution again today.
Thank you.
That's very good. Right, now we've got-
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. We've got Mr. Kaushal on the
Zoom, I see. Good morning. We've got five
minutes with you.
We have read your submission.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and the members of the committee,
and thank you for the opportunity to appear today.
My name is Sunny Kaushal, and I've been the
chair of the Ministerial Advisory Group for the
victims of retail crime.
So you already have my written
submissionSo today I want to briefly
focus on why these reforms matter
operationally for retailers and frontline
workers.
The
Trespass Act
is one of the key tools retailers rely
on to keep offenders out of their stores.
Mm.
However, the act is outdated
and no longer fit for purpose,
particularly in modern retail settings.
It still largely resembles legislation
originally passed
58 years ago. That was in 1968, at
a time when New Zealand's retail environment
and population were completely different.
Yeah.
Retailers today are dealing with
organized theft groups,
repeat offenders,
moving from store to store,
intimidation to staff,
and offenders who have learned how to
exploit gaps in the law.
Across our consultations, Mr. Chair,
throughout New Zealand,
retailers consistently told us the current
trespass process is impractical,
ineffective, and too easily undermined.
It is too hard, too difficult to trespass
offenders whose identities are unknown.
It is too difficult to issue trespass notices
across multiple sites.
And critically,
it is too easy for offenders to frustrate
the process entirely.
That is why I strongly support this
bill.
Okay, fantastic.
Then-
I've got a question from Dr. Sue Ng.
Oh, thank you, Chair.
Can I finish and take the
questions, Mr.
Chair?
Say that again?
He wasn't-
Can I finish and take the questions?
Oh, well, you can, but we won't be able to take questions there.
Okay.
All right. Fair enough, yeah.
I'm just conscious about time. I'm trying to get the committee engaged.
Yep.
Thank you, Chair. I'll be really quick. Thank you for joining us.
Can I just check, in your investigation as well,
what caused the increase in the need for trespassing?
Look,
I respect your concerns. See, first of all, what we need
to see is the retail environment
has changed significantly since these laws
were originally designed.
Retailers today,
they are dealing with organized theft
groups, repeat offending, and coordinated store
hopping behavior. The current framework is often
too difficult to enforce effectively in those
circumstances. The law which currently we
have is too difficult to
even understand and implement. It's impractical.
It doesn't fit for today. So we need to-
That wasn't quite my question
... we need to make those changes. Yeah.
So you do mention increasing organized crime and people who
are able to exploit. What do you think caused that?
Well, it's the behavior.
There
are no consequences. There's no accountability,
and that's what has been exploited.
There are flaws in the law, and that's what we need to change, Mister.
And this will address the accountability?
This is one of the tools because the business owners,
they need to make sure that they're able to run
their businesses in a safer environment.
At present, it's
very hard. But what retailers are dealing is
that the frontline workers do not feel safe.
The frontline workers should not be expected to tolerate
threatening or abusing behavior, as I said, simply
because the situation is complex.
The law needs to provide practical tools
while still allowing appropriate judgment and safeguards.
Thank you.
All right. Hey, thank you for your submission.
You've obviously submitted before on this, but
nice to hear from you again this morning. So, nice to see you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Now we've got-
Are there not.
Are there not?
So Karen,
our Community Law Centers, Aotearoa.
In person.
Nice that you've turned up. We like it when people turn up.
It's great when the committee's here as well.
Now, when-
Fair point.
You have better things than I, of course.
That's a weird statement.
But anyway, we've read your submission, so we're keen to hear from
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and tena koutou to the rest of the
committee. It's good to be here today.
CLCA is the national body that coordinates with community law centers across the
country. My job is to hear from community law centers about what
they are seeing on the ground,
and to bring that to you.
We don't support this bill. Our view is that it risks overly
restricting access to essential goods and bringing more people into the
criminal justice system. I'm just going to summarize our submissions
quickly and then be open to any questions.So we are
concerned about the potential for extensions to three years, and I think the
previous submitters referred to some confusion that that might
cause
around multiple locations, but also how long you've been trespassed for, if
it's a
variety of options for how long that is.
And that this is the default where there's no specified timeframe.
So we've given some examples there of experiences where people are trespassed
mistakenly or without
evidence of wrongdoing, which
we sort of talked about before as well, about
it's within the
rights of the occupier. The consequence of this bill for these
kind of scenarios is that people may be unable to attain the relevant
premises for up to three years. This is a long time for people to be
unable to go to the local supermarket, and it's further exacerbated
in smaller towns or rural towns,
where there's a limited number of shops to buy groceries, to go to the
pharmacy,
and to get other essentials.
The bill facilitates trespass notices across multiple locations, as you
know, without reasonable cause to suspect that the person will go to those
other properties, and this power can be exercised by a group of occupiers
as well, which we expect that these changes will likely be very
effective in excluding people from multiple locations,
exacerbating the issues I've described.
This change has to be viewed in light of the power this
gives occupiers to restrict movement over quite a wide
geographical area, and without recourse really to any
accessible review or appeal process.
The courts are not really a realistic avenue for
the clients that community law centers advise, given the cost and complexity
and time-consuming nature of those processes.
We, in our submissions, talk about the regulatory impact statement,
which identifies the groups who are most likely to be disproportionately
affected, and we're concerned that ramping up the law in this way will
bring more people
into contact with the police and the criminal justice system who actually need
the assistance of social services,
and that this will cause
further harm.
We recognize that what other submitters have said, that the
law needs a revamp, and we think
that supporting what the Law Society said, that going back
to the beginning might be a better place than to
push this bill through. That's all I have to say on our submissions.
Right. First question from Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. Coming from a family that's been involved in retail for
over 100 years, particularly in fruit and vegetables, which
is one of the key things you're talking about.
How do you balance the challenge of someone needing
access to the food that you're referring to, with the rights
of the retailer-
Mm-hmm
... who's having their product stolen
illegally and being able to say, "Actually, you can't come into my store." And
if that means you've got to go down the road to find
access to food, well, maybe that's the lesson you need to learn.
Mm.
I'm not saying that you shouldn't be able to trespass.
What we're concerned about is the broad nature of these
powers across a community, across a city.
So if you've got a local grocer, and you're trespassed from that, and you can go
somewhere else, then-
But what if you can't? I'm asking you, how do you balance that concern with the
rights of the
retailer in those small communities you're talking about, who's
having their product stolen in those
examples?
Yeah, and I think what we had previously, there's something
around how do you manage those multiple locations and
what kind of test do you use? Do you just carte blanche,
like this does, or do you put in place some other test to
enable people to at least have access to somewhere else?
Because just because they stole on that occasion, does that mean that they're
necessarily going to go and steal down the road?
All right. Good.
I think that's hanging everybody-
We've got Mr. Todd Stevenson
... in a particular way.
Thanks. And thanks for being here. Good submission.
It's unlikely we're going to go back and start again.
Sure.
So I'm going to just ask, there was a couple of suggestions have come up.
I think the multi-location trespass issue we are
looking at-
Sure
... because I think that,
yeah.
We talked about maybe, and the South Island and the North Island are totally
different places. I'm not even sure where to find.
Yeah.
Law Society mentioned a defense of mistaken identity.
Mm.
Have you got a couple of other suggestions that could be made to make the
bill better in your eyes?
I think that-
We need the answer.
What's that?
Yeah. I think that defense
option is a good way of looking at it because that mistaken
identity issue does come up.
Yeah.
I don't have anything in addition to add to that, to what the Law Society has
recommended.
Thank you.
Thank you, though, guys.
Dr. Soon Nan.
Thank you, Chair. I just want to check with you in terms of your view
on the delivery of the warning, because one of the things that also has been
raised is you can deliver orally. Someone leave, and you'd be
like, "By the way, you're trespassed."
Yeah.
Yeah. I-
How would that interact with some of the people?
I don't have any particular
examples or anecdotes to share on that, but I do
think that
it is quite difficult, particularly when we talk about young people,
when you're just sort of yelling it out or maybe there should be some
more prescription around what that oral
warning has to include. And I think, too,
the regulatory impact statement talks about these
non-regulatory tools and being able to help
retailers to be able to more effectively deliver those notices and to understand
how to do it.
Mm.
Hmm. That's all I can say on that.
All right. Hey, thank you for a good submission.
Thank you so much.
Very helpful.
Thank you. Appreciate it.
And nice to hear from you, and thanks for coming along. Right.
Now, we've got Carolyn again. And you're becoming a
regular.
Well, you and Denise, but I see you've got Ben today.
And Ben. Ben today as well.
Ben's going to be fronting up today, by data
analytics.
Absolutely. Look, thank you very much.
You've watched, so I don't need to tell you anything.
But we do have 10 minutes with you.
Oh, thank you very much for your time, Committee.
Lawrence has already got a question.
Yep. I can see. That's great. And look, we take our
submission as read, and we can come back and highlight some points if there are no
questions. But just to cover off just a couple of questions that
have already been asked, one of the things that was raised
just now was about what happens if someone
has
been trespassed and it's in a situation like a supermarket.
What do they do? They can buy online, or they can click and collect if their click
collect space is outside the supermarket.
So there are alternatives, and I think there have to be repercussions if someone is
constantly-
Mm
... stealing from a retail store. And the thing about a retail store, which was
touched on earlier, is the fact that it is
that mix of a private public space, right?
And the idea of-
True
... trespass is that you can... Because a retailer usually, in
most circumstances, can't control who enters store.
Trespass gives you some ability to control that.
And with the rise of retail crime that we've seen, what we
are seeing are the strong recidivist offenders coming back again and
again. We're seeing machetes in store.
Mm.
We're seeing aggressive and violent behavior, which is really hard for staff and
store owners. So having some ability to control who
comes in, whilst trespass is
the initial tool that is able to be used, that's why it's really
important.
Mm.
And that's why
retailers really want to see it modernized, because it's not as effective as
it could be right now.
If someone's identity is mistaken, someone
raised that question-
Yeah
... there should be an ability for someone to be able to appeal that, to be able to
go to the police and work through with the store owner about
who it is and who it isn't.
So you're saying that's something that needs to be added to the bill?
For sure. Yeah. If someone's mistakenly been trespassed, they need to
have the right of recourse. That should be absolutely included in the
bill. And then we are very strong believers that
three years is useful for some issues, but-
Mm
... which has been raised here this morning.
What we're saying is that proportionality is really
important. Ben, did you want to talk to that?
Yeah, I just wanted to reiterate the need for proportionality that we've
emphasized in the submission.
We know that some retailers
use trespass a lot, but they will default to the
maximum possible trespass. And so with the increase from two to three years,
we'd probably be encouraging retailers to review their policies to ensure that
they're happy the maximum trespass is appropriate for a situation.
For example, where trespassing a young person.
We know that issuing trespass notices is, in practice, quite difficult.
So we support the intention to make this more straightforward.
But with proportionality in mind,
we wonder if defaulting to three years is the right approach.
Although we support retailers being able to exercise discretion to
trespass someone for that length of time, we think it should be a deliberate and
considered option rather than default.
So therefore, if somebody has come in, you've got a kid coming in every day
stealing from you, $10, $15, and they come in every day after school
and you can't catch them, you can't do anything about it, maybe a month is the
appropriate thing to break the cycle, get them out of the store, and then maybe
they do or don't come back after that period of time.
If someone's bringing in a machete or a gun, threatening staff,
three years is-
Mm
... that's pretty easy to be able to determine that three years-
Probably
... is appropriate. But actually being able to be thoughtful about what is
appropriate for that situation, and we think that that's
really important, and that retailers have some
really clear thoughts around why they would
put in place different periods of time, and maybe some guidance could be
useful in that space.
For sure. Okay. Now I've got four questions so far.
Mm.
So you're stimulating lots of conversation.
Yeah. Or more as-
Can we start with Dr. Suna?
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much for coming, Carolyn.
Sure.
Can I just check your submission clause,
paragraph 26E on police accountability?
So one of the questions I have is, we're increasing some of the requirements
for trespassing, but what I'm unclear of is
if you trespass someone and they come in,
what then?
Because the idea is that they shouldn't.
They could.
Yeah.
But if then it's like, "You've been trespassed.
The police needs to be here," but the police doesn't show up.
Mm. Mm.
How would that work?
We'll come back to E, because it's a slightly different question.
But so
our understanding is that the police are more likely to respond if you have
trespassed someone and someone keeps coming back in, depending on the
gravity of the situation-
Yeah
... and obviously availability of resource.
But that pushes someone up a bit higher in the-
Yeah
...
response in terms of the police space, because they have been
trespassed. It has been acknowledged that maybe they've caused harm or whatever
it might be, and you can acknowledge that they've come back to store.
If police are available, they will more likely respond to that.
In terms of
26E,
this was really about thinking that if you're
enacting a new bill or refreshing the current act,
at some point there should be some evaluation to establish as to whether this is
working or not rather than-
Yeah
... set and forget. We should be thinking about, we know that the environment in
retail is continuing to change, and the use of
technology and a whole range of other things are coming in and will come more to
the fore over time. So we should consider an evaluation period
of how effective it is.
Mm.
And are there more-Are there changes that are needed in the
future? But just setting and forgetting, we think is not going to be the right
response.
Yeah. I guess I'm curious as to how well is the police
response evaluation currently with the current trespass?
That might be something we'll look into.
Yes.
Yeah.
Right. Mr Rose then.
Yeah. Thanks for your comments around under 18s.
That was going to be one of my questions.
Yeah.
And breaking that cycle is important.
But
you also raised concerns about the ought-to-have-known threshold being
too subjective.
Yes.
That's right.
Yeah. Why is the ought-to-have-known test problematic without
supporting evidence like CCTV and the like?
So, I guess it's actually making sure that
the whole piece is about if somebody is walking away from you when you're trying to
trespass, you want to be able to have some evidential proof that you're
actually
trying to trespass. And so
being able to use something like technology, like a body camera or phone would be
useful, and then ensuring that you're doing everything you can to follow that
person to ensure that they understand.
But there are some people who just walk away because they don't want to be
trespassed. So it's about that fine balance of finding.
I think that the comments that were made earlier that people are just willy-nilly
trespass people, a retailer doesn't have time for that.
And a trespass has to be completed and lodged with the
police. That's a whole lot of time and admin that retailers don't have time for.
They're only going to trespass people that they need to trespass.
Mm.
But I think just understanding those that are repeat offenders
and will continue to walk away versus those that may not be aware, and you
have to really make sure you've got a good approach, and that you've got
some evidence, then that's good. If you've got bodycam or using your
phone to record
the person as you're talking to them and walking away with them, then that would be
useful.
Right. Good. We got Camilla Village.
Thank you, and thanks for your submission. Just three things quickly.
Three.
Poor Duncan. We haven't shut up, have we?
I just wanted to know with the extension of these trespass notices-
Yes
...
to basically be able to trespass from multiple locations.
Yeah.
Is this something that
the retailers that you represent have called for?
And just quickly, the other thing was you mentioned click and collect, that
people may be able to click and collect and not be
trespassed. Is that something that you think should-
Not not be trespassed. If they're trespassed, that's an option around
how they could get groceries.
Yes.
So if we're talking about essential goods.
Totally, that's what I mean. And obviously there might be the big concern that we
have in that area is around smaller locations where there might not be heaps
of supermarkets and-
Yeah
... and food producers to start with.
So it would be good to know if that's something that you're suggesting.
Yeah.
And the last thing was around young people.
Do you think there should be a different threshold or-
Yeah
... considerations?
Yeah.
Yeah. Those are my three questions.
All right. Liz Roberson.
Short answer first, last, yes.
The first question, what do our members think about multiple locations?
Look,
just came from a meeting on Friday with the police commissioner and
the top 12 retailers in New Zealand, and they're very
cautious about how you would share information across brands.
From a larger retailer
perspective, they're very risk averse, and they would look at it and think, "Well,
if I'm going to give my information to any one of you, how do
I know that you're going to look after it in the same way?" And what the
circumstances-
Well, we're trustworthy politicians.
What about within brands? I don't understand.
So within brands, I think there's a piece about is
it... So I think there's lots of different ways you can look at it.
If you think about retail, there's things like a strip mall where you might see
half a dozen stores and you've got someone that continually comes in.
They might sort of-
What about the Warehouse?
Yep. So the Warehouse-
As a brand wanting to say. I'm just using them
Yeah. So, I won't name them, but so a large retailer may
consider if somebody...
An example would be if you're in Wellington, someone's come into
Lyall Bay, and they've gone to a store out at the shopping
precinct out there of a brand.
And that store has got a store in the city
and in Porirua and Petone. That's within a 20, 25-minute
drive of each other. If that person brings in a machete and threatens to kill
people in store, you would probably want to be able to trespass them
from stores that are in a location where they can easily access.
Would you want to trespass them for the whole of New Zealand?
There is divided opinion on whether you would want to do that.
There is not consensus across retail whether you would do that or not.
So it has to be proportionate for the situation that you're faced
with.
Okay. Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
My question's really simple. There's this default three
years. So if you don't tell them how long they're trespassed,
there's a default that it goes to the longest period.
Oh, Jesus.
And I'm wondering whether you think it would be better
for the default to be an intermediate period so that you
could be a bit more nuanced. If you had a real problematic person like a machete
wielder, sure you go for the three years, but if it's just a
shoplifter, give them two or one or something.
Yeah, that's right. And so we strongly believe there should be proportionality.
So I guess we've got two years at the moment, whether or not you'd
default to two years and then if someone didn't state it.
So that would be only, I reckon, in a situation where someone was not
stopping to be... They're not going to engage with the process-
Yeah, sure
... if someone's walking away.We do think if it's a
lower-level offense, it should be for a shorter period of time to give someone the
opportunity to correct their behavior.
Yeah.
Just on that as well.
We've also, in our submission, suggested that something the
committee could consider is that rather than leaving it blank and
having this backstop, maybe ensuring that the party does have
to actually put in a period of time so that they are actually making that
consideration around-
Right
... the proportionality. That is also an option that could be considered.
Yeah.
Okay, thank you. That's really useful.
Right. Hey, thank you for your submission. That was very good.
Thank you.
Four questions. You really threw it at us.
Thank you, team, for your work.
Thank you.
Really appreciate it. See you.
See you.
Right. Now we've got
Woolworths people,
James and Denver.
Yeah.
Good.
Hello.
Good morning. Hey, now,
we've got 10 minutes with you. You heard
from Professor Finn talking about facial recognition
and the issue in the UK,
and the appeal rights.
Because you're the only people we're hearing from today from owning a
large supermarket, it'd be very good if you could touch on that.
But we've got 10 minutes with us. Please, some questions.
We'll allow some question time. Thank you.
So Chair, we've actually only just jumped on, so we didn't hear that.
But certainly, we'd be happy to
answer any questions around facial recognition-
Okay
... technology, and Denver here is leading that project for us.
So you've got the right people here.
So we've got some sort of opening remarks, I guess, or a summary.
We'd be happy to run through that or just go straight to questions, whatever you'd
prefer. But
my name's James Radcliffe, and I'm the general counsel here at Woolworths New
Zealand, and my colleague, Denver Wren, is our head of safety, health,
and wellbeing. So we're representing Woolworths New
Zealand, which is a supermarket with 185 stores here in
New Zealand and 20,000 team members we employ with
more than three million customers coming through our stores each week.
So we support the bill. We think it gives retailers and gives us
a broader range of tools to deter retail crime and to keep our
team and customers
safe. And so I'll hand over to Denver just to give you a few
sort of statistics that we're seeing over the last wee while and then we'll
take it from there.
Kia ora, and good morning. So I think what I wanted to talk to
is the scale of the problem and the challenge we see across multi-site
operations. So in the last five years, we've
recorded a 238% increase in
physical violence and aggression towards our team and customers.
And I think this is the piece that we know goes conjoint
with the aspects around retail crime.
In 2025 alone, there were more than
22,990 events,
near on 23,000 reports of theft,
650 acts of violence against our team,
and nearly two serious incidents every single day.
So we do know that also edge weapon events, and I've spoken about this previously,
but to refresh you, circa 65 edge
weapon events coming into our stores
over the last 12 months, and that number is increasing year on
year. So we do know that trespass is a key tool
in the city or in the case, so to speak.
And these aspects around harm towards team, customers,
and in our communities is something that we're very keen to try and prevent.
Now, I'll talk to a couple of pieces, and the importance of maybe
multi-location ability with trespass and why we think
this is actually really key, and you heard Carolyn Young referring to some of this.
But certainly, we do see offenders store hop.
So geographically store hopping through an area or a province.
And I'll give you a hypothetical example.
If I'm thinking about recidivist store hoppers that may start
in Ōpōkiho. They could go to Pukekohe. We've got two stores in Pukekohe.
Then through Papakura, Roseland, Takanini, Waiora Shores,
Manurewa, Manukau, Manukau City Mall.
Now, I'm just giving you one geographical example, but we could have
offenders step through easily eight to 12 locations in a
day. And so actually for our team to be able
to trespass those individuals, trespass them with one
trespass notice through a geographical location is very key.
And to your point around proportionality, a recidivist
offender who is actually coming into our stores and repeat offending,
we may recommend that actually they have a proportional scaling of
trespass for the full three years.
We do agree with the conversation that was just had with Retail NZ around it should
be proportional. It would be good to be able to actually have some tools
or guidance in the framework
from the government to actually understand how we could deliver that.
But certainly, we know that recidivist high-harm offenders,
they do move through our communities geographically, and they do cause harm.
And we want to try and prevent this across the party and the
community.
And just a couple of final points, I think, in summarizing our
submission. In terms of the, I guess, deemed knowledge
provisions, which I think we heard a couple of questions about earlier.
We do support that. We do recognize that it shouldn't cover
customers or offenders who aren't aware that they've been served with a
trespass notice. So we would envisage that only covering
the, I think Carolyn Young referred to it before, the
offenders who deliberately refuse to accept a trespass notice as a means of
avoiding it. And
I think a supermarket, we would support some form of evidence for that.
So our team have body-worn cameras, the CCTVs in our
stores, and they're quite well lit.
So we would-Except that it's incumbent on us to
demonstrate that that has actually happened.
And then lastly, in terms of the penalties and deterrents, we do support an
increase in the penalties. We do think that would send a message and help to
deter. So those are our-
Right. Good
... thoughts. Happy to answer questions.
Right. I'm going to ask first, and then I'll go to Todd Simpson.
Hey, just going back to what I started with.
So, the Law Commission, one of the
professors
talked about in England where heavy use of
facial recognition mechanisms, and talked about a
case where,
or maybe the many cases where people
are believed to be the person, the offender, the
trespass, and when they asked to look at the files, the offender
asked to look at them, they clearly say, "Well, that's not me," and it's clear that
they're not. But there's no review mechanism.
So,
maybe they're more advanced in England, but we're obviously moving down that path,
and it seems like you are. I just want to ask, what would
be your procedures
if you're using facial recognition
and the need to make sure that you're getting the right person?
What would you be proposing to do that?
Or do you think that we, the government, should be trying to give you better
guidance on it? Or do you think there's only going to be a few
retailers that have the capability to do that, and therefore we
leave it to you big guys to do it?
Denver, do you want to talk?
Yeah, absolutely. I think it's a very good question, and there
is absolutely, there's layering of controls in the likes of
trespass and technology. The likes of facial recognition is
something that we will see a number of retailers, and certainly we're looking
at. So I think the piece here is,
for someone to go into the likes of technology and be loaded as a
persons of interest, and trespass may not be a sole reason to be loaded into the
likes of technology to be person of interest.
However, there's an aspect here of being able to
know that that person could cause harm.
They are identified as coming in with weapons, extreme
physical harm, and a risk to team or customers.
And that piece around identification, you've called it, right?
We may not know who those individuals are.
However, we may know through the likes of our aura system
and
connecting of files and/or of this
recidivist nature of offending, those persons may be identified.
So that may go into technology, and it may actually sit there.
I think the question to your point, though, is there should always be recourse for
an individual to understand, am I loaded in your system?
What do you have on me, and is that actually me?
And I think that's for all retailers, and all users of
technology to make sure that how they're using the system is transparent.
And actually, if there are concerns from individuals that they know there's a
process to be able to question and then be able to say, "Well, if it's
not me, then
my name is removed from the system." Or, what is the process?
So what's the governance and the assurance process in place that can give our
communities confidence that actually technology is being
used well?
And do you think that we should be, we the government, should be
doing that in guidance of setting that rule?
Or do you think because there'll be a smaller number of retailers, we
can rely on you big guys and hope that you do the right thing?
Well, I would expect that as we go through this process of
assessing facial recognition,
FRT, and the measures that we need to put in place to ensure that's
robust at the privacy, because we'd be working closely with the Privacy
Commissioner to satisfy
him that the measures we have in place are appropriate.
So, to your question, Mr. Chair, I think that with the Privacy
Commissioner should rest the
responsibility to provide guidance.
Cool. Right, I've got Mr. Todd Simpson.
Thank you both. Thanks for being here.
Just back on the deemed knowledge, can you just give me a bit more of a-- You've
touched on it in paragraph nine of your submission, but just tell us a
bit more about the reality of how people actually avoid
being trespassed or issued with a trespass notice today.
Absolutely. I'm happy to talk that through.
So currently what may happen is that there is
a significant theft event or violent
aggressive behavior,
antisocial behavior, and
it has to be of a reasonable level. So I would call that of an
extreme level.
What will generally happen is when our
store team are asking for that individual to leave, and they will often be
using the term, "You are trespassed from this premises.
I'm asking you to leave."
Oh, we're on.
They don't have it and put it on paper.
So what will happen is often orally actually delivered in the first instance,
and then after that, the team will actually document date, time,
individual, as many of the details that they know, and they're almost waiting for
that individual to come back into the same store, be identified, and
then actually issue it. There's only a very small number of situations and cases
that the police would maybe help us with this.
So it's actually on us as an employer to do that and a retailer.
And a person may object to that trespass being given to them.
So at this point, they may choose to walk away, to Carolyn's point earlier.
They may choose to turn around and walk away, and I've acknowledged you.
Our team may even throw it at the feet of the individual and actually confirm that
they are being trespassed. And then once that's done, then that
can be loaded into the police system.
So I think that's the piece here of we're recommending that the likes of
additional technology being used, whether it's body-worn cameras or
CCTV, to actually
the trespass being issued would be a great
enhancement and actually be able to then solidify that
oral. And because I think this is the piece, right, is the challenge of violent
aggressive behavior or significant theft event.
You're actually trespassing someone orally.
You don't have time to go and write it out.
If we could actually do that and show that it's done, that would be
beneficial.
Yeah. Sorry, just a quick follow-up.
I get the technology point, but also
obviously your store members could also just give
evidence. We do rely on people to
basically say that was served, and you could have corroboration or something in
addition. I suppose the reason I'm asking is because
totally get it in your situation you may have body-worn camera technology, but
smaller retails might just be a couple of them there in the
store, and they may not have the technology you do.
So
basically you just think as long as there's some evidentiary-
Yes
... way of proof.
Some credential. That's right, to prove, and it may be a written statement,
affidavit, and so on.
Yeah. Okay.
But we do know on our scale that that can be quite cumbersome.
Yeah. No, perfect. Thank you.
Right. Hey, thanks then, Denver and James, again for
presenting. I know we've heard from you before, but thank you for presenting
today. Very helpful, and I'm glad you've shown up.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Thank you, members.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to
go offline.
Oh, we are on track.